---
layout: post
title: Topological Twisting of Supersymmetry
categories: [Physics, QFT, Supersymmetry]
---
**tldr;** Twisting = Redefining Lorentz to involve R-symmetry 
## Introduction and Resources
This is guide on how to perform topological twists that we often see in hep-th models. One might have difficulty coming across good resources with the "SUSY twist" keyword, and that is because this is actually a subject in "Topological String Theory", and good resources include [Vonk's mini course](http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0504147), [Mirror Symmetry book](https://www.amazon.com/Mirror-Symmetry-Clay-Mathematics-Monographs/dp/0821829556) chapter 16. We assume basic [supersymmetry](http://www.damtp.cam.ac.uk/user/tong/susy.html) knowledge. The idea originated from [Witten](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF01466725) in his 1988 paper on topological sigma models. And I have also made a podcast [episode](https://youtu.be/6lpmmTGP9PU) on this. We will try to go through the concept before learning through a few prominent examples.

Do drop me a text on telegram @tch1001 if you have any suggestions for more examples. Would love to be enlightened!
## Generators
In a SUSY theory, beside the Poincare generators $P^{\mu}, M^{\mu\nu}$, there are 4 SUSY generators $\mathcal{Q}_+, \bar{\mathcal{Q}}_+, \mathcal{Q}_-, \bar{\mathcal{Q}}_-$ that satisfy a bunch of supercommutator relations (defining the superalgebra of the theory). Lorentz generators $M^{\mu\nu}$ have representations labelled by $(m,n)$. For example
- $(0,0)$ is a scalar $\phi$
- $(\frac1 2, 0)$ and $(0, \frac1 2)$ are Weyl spinors $\psi$
- $(\frac1 2,\frac1 2)$ is a vector $V^\mu$
- etc. $\Phi$

Hence the action of $M^{\mu\nu}$ on fields $\Phi$, usually written as $[M^{\mu\nu}, \Phi]$, is some Lorentz boost or rotation of the field. This is the common saying "Lorentz transforming a spinor", "rotating a spinor by $4\pi$".

Then the SUSY generators $Q^I_\alpha, \bar Q^I_{\dot\alpha}$ act on the field $\Phi$, written as $[Q^I_\alpha, \Phi\}$ (super Lie bracket), transforms fermions into bosons and bosons into fermions. This is the usual discussion about "superpartners".

Each generator of the full SUSY algebra is either bosonic (such as $P^\mu, M^{\mu\nu}$, and R-symmetry (discussed later)) or fermionic (such as $Q^I_\mu, \bar{Q}^I_\mu$). The super Lie bracket follows the following rules
$$
\begin{aligned}
[\text{bosonic, bosonic}\} &= \text{commutator}\\
[\text{bosonic, fermionic}\} &= \text{commutator}\\
[\text{fermionic, fermionic}\} &= \text{anti-commutator}
\end{aligned}
$$

## Motivation
When considering a theory's symmetries, the no-go/Coleman-Mandula theorem states that any non-Poincare symmetry $T$ of this theory (e.g. $SU(3)$ for QCD, $SU(2)$ for electroweak, $U(1)$ for QED) must **commute** with the Poincare generators $[T,M^{\mu\nu}] = [T,P^\mu] = 0$. In other words, $T$ is an **internal** symmetry, which means the symmetry groups can be "trivially factorised" as
$$\text{Symmetry} = \text{Poincare} \times T$$
(the internal symmetries do not mix with spacetime symmetries)

Noether's theorem says that these internal (continuous) symmetries give rise to some conserved Noether charge. 
- QCD: color
- QED: electrical charge

The charge of a field is determined by how $T$ acts on it. (A blog post coming up soon on this, titled "Representations of Symmetries from Adjoint Action" or something) For example, if a complex scalar field $\phi(x)$ in $4D$ transforms under $[T, \phi]=+\phi$ means that $\phi$ has a $U(1)_T$ charge 
$$
\begin{aligned}
Q= i \int d^3x \ (\phi^* \partial_t \phi - \phi \partial_t \phi^*)
\end{aligned}
$$

In the proof of the no-go theorem, there is an assumption the symmetries form a Lie algebra: the commutator is the Lie bracket. The premise of supersymmetry is to let symmetries live in a super Lie algebra instead, so that no-go theorem (which prohibits non-zero commutators) no longer holds. So we are now allowed to to consider generators $Q^I_\alpha, \bar Q^I_{\dot\alpha}$ that **do not commute** with Lorentz. The collection of $Q,P^\mu,M^{\mu\nu}$ is called the super Poincare algebra.

## R-symmetry
The question we now ask is: so does every non-super-Poincare bosonic symmetry of any (classical) theory supercommute with super-Poincare? And the answer is no!

There are bosonic symmetry generators $R$ that do not suprecommute with $Q$. 
$$[R,Q_\alpha]=-Q_\alpha \qquad [R,\bar Q_{\dot\alpha}]=+\bar Q_{\dot\alpha}$$
The action of $R$ on each field $\Phi$ determines the $U(1)_R$ Noether charge of $\Phi$. 

In a non-SUSY theory, fields of different spin can have any $U(1)_{EM}$ charge they want provided there exists a representation mathematically (spin-$\frac 1 2$ electron with charge while spin-$\frac 1 2$ neutrino with no charge, spin-$1$ $W^{\pm}$ and $Z$ bosons have charge while spin-$1$ photons have no charge). We see that there is no constraint on the $U(1)_{EM}$ charge of different spins.  

The same **cannot** be said about $U(1)_R$ charge due to $[R,Q]=-Q$. By (super) Jacobi identity, 
$$[[R,Q],\Phi] - [R,[Q,\Phi]] + [Q, [R, \Phi]] = 0$$
Suppose $\Phi$ has R-charge $n$ and $[Q,\Phi]$ has R-charge $m$, i.e.
$$
\begin{aligned}
[R,\Phi] &= n\Phi \\
[R,[Q,\Phi]] &= m[Q,\Phi]
\end{aligned}
$$
then the Jacobi identity reduces to $n=m+1$. In other words, fields $\Phi$ and $[Q,\Phi]$ of different spin-statistics (superpartners) have constraints on their R-charge. 

It is worth noting that there is a way to see this in the superspace formalism too. A blog for another day!

## Example: 2D $\mathcal{N} = (2,2)$ theory
Although I wanted to introduce twisting in a general setting, I believe it is best illustrated using the $D=2, \mathcal{N}=(2,2)$ theory for simplicity. I wrote a [blog](https://tch1001.github.io/physics/qft/2023/02/28/susy.html) on what $(2,2)$ means. The theory we will use is the non-linear sigma model
$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathcal{L}&=-g_{i \bar{\jmath}} \partial^\alpha \phi^i \partial_\alpha \bar{\phi}^j-2 i g_{i \bar{\jmath}} \bar{\psi}_{-}^j \Delta_{+} \psi_{-}^i-2 i g_{i \bar{\jmath}} \bar{\psi}_{+}^j \Delta_{-} \psi_{+}^i-R_{i \bar{\jmath} k \bar{l}} \psi_{+}^i \psi_{-}^k \bar{\psi}_{+}^j \bar{\psi}_{-}^l\\
R_{i \bar{\jmath} k \bar{l}} & =g^{m \bar{n}} g_{m \bar{\jmath}, \bar{l}} g_{\bar{n} i, k}-g_{i \bar{\jmath}, k \bar{l}} \\
\Delta_{ \pm} \psi^i & =\partial_{ \pm} \psi^i+\Gamma_{j k}^i \partial_{ \pm} \phi^j \psi^k \\
\Gamma_{j k}^i & =g^{i \bar{l}} g_{\bar{l} j, k}
\end{aligned}
$$
Fear not! It is just a Taylor expansion of the D-term of a chiral superfield in the superspace formalism. 

We want to find out all the (classical) symmetries of this theory. Using a few tricks from the superspace formalism, one finds there are $4$ SUSY generators $\mathcal{Q}_+, \mathcal{Q}_-, \bar {\mathcal{Q}}_+, \bar{\mathcal{Q}}_-$ and $2\ R$-symmetry generators $F_V, F_A$ on top of $3$ Poincare generators $H\equiv T^{00},P\equiv T^{01},M\equiv M^{01}$ (remember we are working in 2D). We must state all the supercommutators/super Lie brackets between the generators to fully define the symmetry algebra. However, I will only state the important ones for twisting and leave you to read the details in "A mini-course on topological strings by Vonk" (chapter 5). 
$$
\begin{aligned}
\left[M, \mathcal{Q}_{ \pm}\right]  & =\mp \mathcal{Q}_{ \pm} \\
\left[M, \overline{\mathcal{Q}}_{ \pm}\right]  & =\mp \overline{\mathcal{Q}}_{ \pm}\\
\left[F_V, \mathcal{Q}_{ \pm}\right]&=+\mathcal{Q}_{ \pm} \\
\left[F_V, \overline{\mathcal{Q}}_{ \pm}\right]&=-\overline{\mathcal{Q}}_{ \pm}\\
\left[F_A, \mathcal{Q}_{ \pm}\right]&= \pm \mathcal{Q}_{ \pm} \\
\left[F_A, \overline{\mathcal{Q}}_{ \pm}\right]&=\mp \overline{\mathcal{Q}}_{ \pm}
\end{aligned}
$$
One sees that $M,F_V,F_A$ transforms the SUSY generators $\mathcal{Q}$ into something proportional $\propto \mathcal{Q}$. Observe that any linear combination $M'$ of $M, F_V, F_A$ will transform a $Q$ into something proportional too, just with a different factor. Topological twisting can be defined as the replacement of the Lorentz generator $M$ with a new $M'$. Not all linear combinations will be good: there are some constraints to be a "well defined" twisting. 

Since spin is the label classifying representations of the Lorentz algebra, redefining Lorentz will mean we redefine spins of fields. Fortunately, it's actually simply arithmetic to find the new spins.

## Example: A-twisting

Fun sidenote: This twisted model is called A model, which conveniently is related to Type IIA superstring theory. Apparently this was a coincidence! (Source: Witten claimed so in Hirosi's [lecture](https://youtu.be/vBo0tJeO_4w))

Let's redefine the Lorentz generator to be
$$ M_A = M-F_V$$
We take the field $\psi^i = (\psi_-^i, \psi_+^i)^T$ as an example, if it transforms as 
$$
\begin{aligned}
[M,\psi_-^i] &= +\psi_-^i\\
[M,\psi_+^i] &= -\psi_+^i
\end{aligned}
$$ 
meaning it lives in the $(0,\frac 1 2)$  representation of $M$, aka right-handed Weyl spinor. And 
$$
[F_V, \psi_-^i] = ???\psi_-^i\\
[F_V, \psi_+^i] = +\psi_+^i
$$ 
meaning it has a $U(1)_V$-charge of $+1$, then 
$$
[M_A, \psi_+^i] = -2\psi_+^i
$$
which implies that in the new twisted theory, it lives in the $(0, 1)$-representation of $M_A$, aka 